come up over the horizon for you if you
don't sing the song of what the future
is then the world won't be there for us
and so this cultural change that we
often want like for me as an aboriginal
australian getting out there and kind of
doing
taking this time to say here's a whole
lot of stories that can actually enrich
your life and make it a deeper more
exciting
life to live but also you can then see
the future in a different way anyway i i
feel that those they're very mighty big
things look like what um jason was
saying you can also have some fun you
know and fun's okay
but also this idea of prototyping a
vocabulary for the future is often what
i've been saying that art does does well
yeah ming long
i guess we all strive for an
understanding of who we are in this
place whatever place we're in
to get a deeper deeper connection uh to
where we are and who we are as
australians
what are the things that make us awkward
or uncomfortable about trying to do that
um i suppose from my perspective
sometimes i feel like you know as as an
australian there's a there's a
expectation that we have a minimum level
of understanding of indigenous
australian culture and to be honest we
don't like i i don't feel like i feel
like i still need to read the um the 101
of dummies indigenous um
culture and i guess that's part of the
resistance the notion that there's a
deficit that needs to be uh remedied
right as opposed to a cultural
experience that you will enjoy and have
fun right
but i think i think those avenues to
actually educators is actually quite
important so i don't mind which avenues
you take whether it's um the quad pike
or it's the eating the mud crabs is at
least there is an avenue for you to
actually explore something that is quite
important to
fundamentally being an australian
then also will then expand your mind
because i always think in our minds we
have a status quo of just what we know
we think that's that's you know we're
geniuses in our minds but there is so
much out there that we don't know and we
need to get over that fear of that
unknown and it's okay to to not know
it's okay not to to understand some of
these fundamentals because we're all in
this lifelong you know learning sort of
journey um but
sometimes i do feel like there is a fear
of you know showing that you you're just
an idiot and i should notice something
and i don't um
but you know some many times it's
actually just
easier to own up to the fact to say i i
don't understand can someone please help
me
um and that's why i think you know what
enoch was talking about in terms of
singing the song of the features we want
to see
um you know to me
i translated that immediately to
corporate speak and i'm so sorry um
because i always think of it as
the mckinsey type of horizon one two and
three and you're seeking
um
to our country and i think that's
wonderful but
that idea
the story we're about to create that
idea of curiosity but also being
you know the discomfort of not knowing
is okay it's all right to just feel a
little uncomfortable at the moment i
think often what we're doing in our
society is going uh
if if i feel comfortable then that's
right if i feel discomfort then that's
wrong both politically socially and the
arts are a great way of feeling a little
bit of discomfort and then having to
unpack it and see if there's something
in it we've got about 30 seconds left
west uh one of the the triumphs of the
festival over over a number of years now
has been the vigil the on the night
before anzac day where people with
australia day where people sit
uh and and and watch the dawn come and
imagine that moment when the ships came
why has that been so powerful and drawn
so many people indigenous and
non-indigenous because it's not a
protest it's not a big celebration it's
a moment of reflection and a sense of
the australia day the 26th of january
has become contestable very quickly in
the last 20 years or more and so the
idea of saying actually let's take some
time out take a pause to think is not a
bad thing and that's what the vigil did
and that's what this summer is about
with festivals
all over australia a wonderful
conversation thanks so much to everyone
for being part of it wesley garnett
kerry chigrovsky ming and bhakti in
melbourne have an excellent weekend
we'll be back with you next week good
night
spicks and specs returns for a special
episode celebrating music of the 2010s
guests include kate miller heike vance
joy claire hooper and luke mcgregor see
you very soon australia the specs and
specs 2010 special on abc and eye view
abc presents a season of programs and
stories exploring our environment and
seeking solutions to the climate
challenge your planet on
iview radio and online abc.net dot a u
slash your planet
good evening it's friday the 11th of
december here are top stories the us
closes in on approved covered vaccine as
the death toll continues to mount
hong kong media tycoon jimmy ly charged
under controversial national security
laws
islamic state claims the murder of an
afghan tv presenter
and scott morrison excluded from
speaking at a global climate summit this
weekend
you're watching the world
hello there yvonne young also tonight
protests erupt in new caledonia over the
sale of a major nickel mine
but first the news that the u.s is just
one step away from having an approved
vaccine couldn't have come sooner in
recent days the country's been reporting
record daily rises in coronavirus deaths
more than three thousand americans lost
their lives yesterday as experts warned
the worst is yet to come but there's now
reason to be optimistic for the worst
affected nation after an advisory body
to the u.s food and drug administration
voted in favor of giving the fisa
vaccine emergency approval the fda will
have to accept the recommendations with
hopes the jabs will be rolled out next
week and hospitals across the country
are ready for delivery
this whole freezer can hold like a
couple hundred thousand doses we expect
we'll only probably get in the thousands
initially
and maybe five thousand doses at any
given time at one site so it should be
really
absolutely sufficient it's not going to
be like filling your freezer at home
we purchased uh this specific ultra low
freezer
for the covet vaccine
we are one of eight sites within los
angeles county department of health
service that purchase the refrig the
freezer
we wear protective gear
in order to access it
and we want to keep the temperature as
close to the original temperature as
possible so we quickly remove things and
close it
and south korea is also preparing itself
with a super freeze warehouse in seoul
offering to store pfizer's covert 19
vaccine located underground the facility
boasts temperatures frostier than an
antarctic winter making it suitable to
maintain the minus 70 degrees needed for
bulk storage
we can control the temperature
completely so it doesn't fall or rise by
using lng as refrigerant is low such a
massive distribution needs the stable
bulk storage we can provide
so far south korea has arranged to buy
20 million doses of the vaccine
and we'll have more on the latest
vaccine developments with rebecca
weintraub from the harvard medical
school a little later
australia's hopes of developing a
homegrown coroner's virus vaccine have
been dealt a major blow with the
queensland trial being abandoned the
shock announcement came after university
of queensland scientists and the vaccine
manufacturer revealed participants
returned false positive hiv results the
medical team is devastated
it was a race against time and back in
january university of queensland virus
experts were confident we're aiming to
have something that's ready to go into
humans in 16 weeks time and in early
clinical trials it looked promising the
vaccine was shown to be safe and
extremely well tolerated in all of our
vaccines
216 people in all the problem was the
use of an hiv protein used in the
molecular clamp technology it was a
small fragment of hiv and scientists
were aware of the risks of false
positive results there was a theoretical
risk of this we thought all be at a very
low risk in a shock result everyone who
had the vaccine came up with the false
positive the federal government was told
on monday and jointly today with csl it
was decided to halt the project
the risk to vaccine confidence
was the principal issue here it was a
very very good technology
it was looking like it was going to make
antibodies and it probably would have
worked very well as a vaccine but it
would have been hard to convince the
public it was safe it's certainly a
tough day for for the team
to get this to get this news especially
seeing the very positive data come out
of the trial it's very sad time but also
we're very proud of what we have
achieved trial participants didn't know
if they were taking the vaccine or a
placebo it's just such a terrible shame
that it is ending this way but i would
do it again in a heartbeat i have no
concerns about recording a false
positive heather shearer says
researchers were very upfront about any
risk i knew that they were using a
modified part of the hiv virus but the
actual
possibility of getting hiv was
impossible the uq scientists are leaders
in clamp technology and did have other
options from the start in hindsight you
know the uq team of course it's a
wonderful thing we would look back and
perhaps change the molecular clamp that
they'll be using because there are other
options
but you know they went ahead with this
and they you know everyone knew that
this was a possibility
because patients were warned about it
the queensland government invested 10
million dollars into the research with
no regrets they've been working night
and day i mean they have been making the
ultimate sacrifice
but of course there are going to be some
winners and losers when it comes to
vaccines what has happened today is not
a surprise to the government
but what is important is that the plan
was in place to deal with this so the
race for a vaccine continues i think the
world is in safe hands as we bow out of
this project lexi hamilton smith abc
news
meantime pharmaceutical giants
glaxosmithkline and sanofi have
announced their covert 19 vaccine will
not be viable the companies say the
vaccine they were developing has shown
an insufficient immune response in
clinical trials they plan to start
another study in february delaying the
potential launch of a vaccine until the
end of 2021. the failure is a blow for
vaccines that rely on conventional
proven designs as opposed to the pfizer
beyond tech product which uses new
technology
hong kong pro-democracy media tycoon
jimmy lye has been charged under a
controversial new law on suspicion of
conspiring with foreign forces and
endangering national security the
73-year-old founder of the apple daily
was arrested in august after police
raided the headquarters of the newspaper
he's the most high-profile person to be
charged under beijing's national
security law since it was implemented in
june and could face life in prison under
the legislation secession subversions
terrorism and collusion with foreign
forces to intervene in hong kong affairs
are all
illegal an australian man has been
reunited with his wife and son more than
three years after they were stopped from
leaving china in a crackdown on the
uyghur muslim community
saddam adul
adobe met his three-year-old son for the
first time at sydney airport his wife
nadilla was pregnant and waiting for her
australian spouse visa in china's
xinjiang region when her passport was
confiscated in 2017. a four corners
story last year highlighted the family's
plight prompting the australian
government to request chinese
authorities to allow the mother and son
to leave it's estimated at least one
million uyghurs have been held in
internment camps in xinjiang
islamic state has claimed responsibility
for the death of a young female tv
presenter and women's rights advocate in
afghanistan she's the latest victim in a
spate of killings targeting reporters
human rights workers and political
figures across the country andrea
nearhoff reports
it's an all too familiar site in
afghanistan a coffin draped in fabric
preparing for its final journey
inside the body of 25 year old malala
maiwand yet another victim of islamist
militants
in the third district of jalalabad city
television anchor and social activist
malala maiwand was shot and killed along
with her driver by unknown gunman
the deaths come as peace talks between
afghan leaders and the taliban continue
and amid a wave of violence aimed at
high profile figures
a month ago a bomb explosion took the
life of radio reporter elias daye and
injured his brother child and another
man
days earlier tv anchor yama ciawash was
killed along with two other civilians in
the blast in kabul
reporters without borders say
afghanistan is one of the world's
deadliest countries for journalists
there's concern too over a potential
reversal of progress on women's rights
if the hardline taliban group get back
into power
the un's assistance mission in
afghanistan has also condemned the
killing of malala saying it was
particularly shocking that it happened
on international human rights day her
killing has been claimed by islamic
state
[Music]
i have very clearly asked these security
institutions to find the murderer at any
cost the murderer will be brought to
justice
but for how many others will it be too
little too late
andre niehoff abc news
boris johnson says britain must prepare
for an australian-style trade agreement
with the european union speaking for the
first time since a crucial meeting in
brussels the british prime minister said
there's a strong possibility the uk will
fail to get a post-brexit deal
there's always the possibility the
prospect of coming out on australian
terms which i believe are very good
terms and we as i say can prosper
mightily
in that future
the two sides are having difficulty
agreeing on competition rules and
fishing rights they have until the end
of the month to reach a deal before the
uk stops following eu trade rules
international momentum to address
climate change is growing with world
leaders lining up to pledge greater
emissions reduction targets it's left
scott morrison on the outer excluded
from speaking at un-led talks and again
forced to defend australia's climate
policy here's melissa clark
well as the world starts to roll out
covert vaccines experts are warning
deals struck by wealthy nations to
secure treatments could leave nine out
of ten of the world's poorest
unvaccinated next year 53 percent of the
most promising coronavirus vaccines have
already been snapped up with canada
securing enough doses to vaccinate its
citizens many times over well rebecca
weintraub is an assistant professor of
global health and social medicine at
harvard medical school and the director
of ariadne labs vaccine delivery and
joins us live from boston rebecca you've
been warning about the danger of vaccine
nationalism well before a covert 19
vaccine was developed
yes first many thanks for having me
and to note you're right this is not a
new pattern in previous pandemics we've
seen this type of activity from nation
states including during h1n1
so now that several are going to the
market are you still concerned
unfortunately yes so we have seen with
respect to advanced market commitments
that many nation states
canada
australia
the united states of america have
actually secured and procured doses
directly from companies in comparison
the entity kovacs which is
the world health organization sepia and
others have secured only 700 million
doses that's for 3.6 billion citizens of
the 92 countries as a part of the kovacs
facility
well those countries that have secured
vaccines
if they distribute the access to
low-income countries is that a workable
model
so less ideal correct so we need to have
an orchestrated global distribution of
this scarce resource
we also need to prioritize it for those
that are at high risk of exposure and
those that are most vulnerable to the
novel virus
so which countries are at particular
risk
excellent point so first the difficulty
is we don't actually have global
surveillance of the novel virus because
of limited testing
but the world health organization and
others have made it clear that the
health workforce is the priority not
only to protect them but the workforce
can actually transmit the virus to
patients and populations so what other
concerns do you have for
low-income countries
so this has been an unprecedented
investment in the discovery of the
vaccine the orchestration and
organization of scientists around the
world to move us from a novel virus
structure it and develop 200 candidates
at the same time we have not been able
to
gain the investment needed for the
delivery systems to generate demand and
secure that the supply is allocated and
distributed across the globe
so what should other countries be doing
to ensure that these don't get left
behind
at some point so first we very much
believe people should be participating
in the kovacs facility at the table with
the world health organization sepi and
gavi and others
and second that we actually need not
only the physical infrastructure to move
the product the flow of the product from
the warehouse into the individual's arm
but we actually need the data
infrastructure we need the flow of the
data
to surveil those who need and then to
monitor and verify that the vaccine has
been received
rebecca weintraub thanks so much for
joining the world tonight really
appreciate it manny thanks for having me
a new report by a cambodian human rights
group has found nearly one-third of rape
of women and girls they've helped
committed by a family member the issue
has been exacerbated by the pandemic
with schools closed and rising
unemployment tasha uibawa has more
seija was just eight years old when she
was raped by her grandfather in a forest
near her home her youth forcefully taken
away from her her real identity has been
kept secret for her safety her mother
says police warned her not to tell
anyone
i said this happened and you want to
keep it a secret also it's a big problem
for my daughter and you want it to be a
secret
a new report by cambodian human rights
group likado found almost one in every
three rape cases they assisted involved
a family relative it also found family
pressure and a financial reliance on
their abusers meant most perpetrators
don't get charged the organization
suggests stronger protection for victims
in legal proceedings and a consistent
implementation of the law during rape
cases
of all the 137 cases of rape or
attempted rape investigated by the ngo
for almost three years 46 percent of
victims reported sexual violence by a
blood relative and only around half of
these cases resulted in conviction when
they know the victim they know very well
how to reach the victim and with them
trust the rapist
so that is why
mostly happen to the
between victim and the rapist they know
each other the cases investigated do not
reflect the wider prevalence of rape
across the country however many cases
are never reported at all
last year the u.n high commissioner for
human rights found there are still
barriers towards cambodian women seeking
justice particularly in rural areas it
found cultural stigma corruption and
limited access to information as some of
the reasons why women often choose to
stay silent tasha wibawa abc news
morocco has become the fourth arab
league country to agree to normalize
relations with israel in the past four
months the agreement was brokered by the
trump administration which as part of
the deal said the u.s would recognize
morocco's claim over the long disputed
western sahara region
israel's prime minister thanked the u.s
president and said he would move quickly
to establish full diplomatic relations
with morocco i want to thank to
the king of morocco
king muhammad vi
for taking this historic decision to
bring historic peace between us
israel has also recently struck deals
with the united arab emirates bahrain
and sudan
lebanon's outgoing prime minister and
three former ministers have been charged
with negligence for failing to prevent
the devastating explosion at the beirut
port in august middle east correspondent
eric torchek reports
the judge heading an official inquiry
into the beirut blast has charged
outgoing prime minister hassan diab and
lebanon's former finance transport and
public works ministers for failing to
secure and dispose of ammonium nitrate
at the capital's port
thousands of tons of the explosive
compound had been sitting there for more
than six years but lebanon's government
agencies didn't deal with it a fire at a
nearby warehouse caused it to ignite
with the subsequent explosion killing
200 people and wounding 6 000 others
mr diab says he's surprised to be
charged as he was only prime minister
for a short time before the blast he
says he was only told about the ammonium
nitrate in june and handled the file
transparently asking for a report from
the state security service
lebanon senior judges knew about the
ammonium nitrate for much longer but
none of them managed to get a government
agency to take responsibility for it
more than 20 people most of whom worked
at the port have been arrested so far
for failing to prevent the blast but
many lebanese think those truly
responsible are the long-serving
political leaders who took the country
from dysfunction to collapse they have
not been charged
eric torject there now tensions over the
future of new caledonia's valet nickel
plant have erupted into violent protests
on the streets of numer with cars
torched shops vandalized and police and
protesters injured in clashes it's
prompted the brazilian mining giant to
evacuate its operations there as
demonstrators were filmed carrying
weapons behind torched roadblocks denise
fisher is a former australian consul
general in new caledonia and she said
the unrest is just a part of a bigger
issue the independence referendum
process
well these protests which really have
degenerated rather badly yesterday
are really at the at the heart of uh
what's going on in new caledonia at the
moment which is an independence
referendum process
you know um new calendar is quite
important for australia it's you know
part of that geostrategic arc to our
north east it's like a buff estate to
the rest of the world
and it also straddles our major sea
lanes so what happens there is quite
important for australia and we haven't
really had to think too much about
what's been going on there for the last
30 years because there have been peace
agreements
that france has broken with
leaders of political parties who both
want to stay with france and those who
want to actually become independent and
at the core of the independence leaders
demands is in fact what happens to the
nickel resource nickel is new
caledonia's major resource
it's
something like 12
of the world's resources in nickel
reside there
and it's certainly enough to fund an
independent government certainly enough
to fund an independent country
so how does the controversy over the
ownership of the mine play into these
issues with independence that you're
talking about here
well at core is really the participation
and ownership of the benefits and the
production of the major nickel resource
um you know the the world nickel market
is quite volatile and they've been a lot
of problems in the production of nickel
and the pricing of nickel in the last
few years
part of the peace agreements that france
brokered with the different political
parties the 1980s was what's known as
the mining prerequisite which is that
basically the revenue and the production
of nickel should be shared
more uh throughout new caledonia between
the come up north and the european south
two big plants were invested in major
multi-million billion dollar nickel
producing plants including the one in
the south which has been the subject of
these protests yesterday
about a year ago
the multinational owner of vale brazil
decided that they wanted to pull out you
know the prices have been bad there's
been volatility technical problems
um an australian company made an offer
in july
but they pulled out just before the
second referendum in october
this year
because the independence leaders said
they didn't want a uniquely
foreign-owned plant they wanted
greater share for the eukardonian people
subsequently vale has been in
negotiations with a company swiss
investor
but the local indigenous leaders decided
that they they came up with a
proposition that involved a korean
company
by thursday uh brazil uh vale brazil
decided to sign on with the swiss
company and that's been the immediate
precipitation of this protest movement
yesterday which degenerated into into
violence and in fact shooting
throughout the day
and denise where does it leave
negotiations now and what are protesters
demanding
the protesters are demanding
greater local new caledonian
participation in the ownership and
production
of the nickel resource
so the kinds of proposals that they've
put forward have involved at least 51
ownership by new caledonian interests
most of their projects of course have
involved the northern province which is
the primarily cunning part of new
caledonia
so that loyalists who may be located in
the south have said no no you're just
trying to take over our southern plant
when the main point the independence
leaders are making is that they want
greater new caledonia participation so a
lot of it is about establishing ambit
claims
because it's a critical time now for all
leaders to get around the table and
start discussing what happens indeed
after the third referendum which will be
in 2022 what will the shape of new
caledonia be after that
the french government has been trying to
broker a roundtable discussions which
have been fraught with difficulty with
various parties withdrawing over the
last couple of years
but finally last night the minister for
overseas france overseas territories in
france has
invited everybody to come to paris
to talk not about just goro this
particular
processing plant that was the subject of
yesterday's disturbances but also about
the overall share of new caledonians in
all of the mines in new caledonia in all
of the production talking about
environmental regulations a number of
the general issues that the independence
leaders have wanted to be at the top of
the agenda
and how do you think this might play out
what's the feeling on the ground as well
i think that
if everyone can agree to sit around the
table and start discussing these issues
the best we can hope for
is that collaboration will produce
agreement
sadly the history of new caledonia
around nickel has not been
very promising up till now
over the 30 years of the peace
agreements there have been promises of a
strategic review of the entire nickel
resource the entire nickel
program for new caledonia
urged by the independence movement
leaders
these have come to nothing over 30 years
so there's a lot of um
lack of legitimacy and credibility uh on
the part of the independence leaders and
for the the loyalists part there's a lot
of concern and really fear after the
results of the referendum you know the
constant increasing in support for
independence has worried a lot of the
loyalist leaders and they really feel
that um they're in an increasingly
powerless position
so i think
all hopes now lie with the negotiating
and mediating capacities of the french
state
as has been so often the case in the
past to get all the parties around the
table and to be able to secure agreement
peaceful agreement about the way forward
denise thanks so much for talking to us
it's a pleasure
time magazine has jointly named u.s
president-elect joe biden and his
running mate kamala harris as the 2020
person of the year in an online profile
the magazine says the pair offered
restoration and renewal in a single
ticket and encouraged the highest voter
turnout in the century with 81 million
votes and counting the winners were
chosen from three finalists including
healthcare workers on the coronavirus
front lines participants in the black
lives matter movement and president
donald trump who won the title in 2016.
a naturally formed ice cave has formed
on a high altitude glacier in the swiss
alps dubbed the ice cathedral the bluish
cave is about five meters high and 20
meters long each spring and summer the
cavity fills with water from the snow
melts forming a lake in autumn the plug
disappears and the water drains leaving
the cave the unique site is only
accessible by foot and organisers say
visitors should enter at their own risk
[Music]
to what in the world now and in a year
where a lot of unexpected things have
occurred a u.s sanitation company has
released a video showing dozens of
portable toilets singing hallelujah
well these are the jingle johns a series
of porter potties adorned with christmas
lights and led faces that sing a
multitude of carols their exploits have
been lighting up social media and as of
late with the company even trying to
claim a world record for the most
animated faces on a single holiday light
display no such record exists at the
moment but in terms of any toilet themed
acts it's pretty hard to top
you're watching the world the top
stories we're following tonight
regulators in the u.s to decide within
days whether to approve pfizer's covet
19 vaccine for public use
charges laid against hong kong
pro-democracy media tycoon jimmy lai
under a controversial national security
law
and australia on the outer over its
climate policy as international momentum
grows to address climate change
let's return to our top story now and
just one final hurdle stands between the
united states and its most concerted
national fight back against the pandemic
so far
the nation's health regulator the food
and drug administration will decide
within days whether to approve pfizer's
covert 19 vaccine for public use it's
being encouraged to
by an advisory committee of experts keen
to trigger mass immunizations as soon as
possible from washington greg janet
reports
from brussels with haste the landings
bumpy the cargo undisturbed
united's transatlantic dash to virginia
is a shakedown chill rooms at the ready
for vaccines soon to come that's
probably
the biggest logistical challenge in air
freight that we we've ever seen dr lee
voted yes an advisory panel to the
health regulator the food and drug
administration is convinced so we do
have a favorable vote that the benefits
of the fisa vaccine outweigh its risks
we are just a few short days away from
what i believe
will be the beginning of the end
of the coronavirus pandemic in america
the fda itself will give the tick for
national use as soon as this weekend
we wear protective gear los angeles
county hospitals are counting the days
for exposed staff to get better
protection those people who work in
areas such as the er or the icu settings
so the very first allocation will be
targeting employees once approvals
through the mammoth task of getting
fizer's vaccine out to 20 million
americans in this month alone gets
underway more than 13 billion dollars
has already been spent getting operation
warp speed up to this point but anxious
states want democrats and republicans on
capitol hill to strike a deal for
another covert funding relief package so
100 million americans can be immunised
by march
for states like idaho racking up daily
record death rates it's a matter of
hanging on in hope for an immunisation
effect over 19 patients taking up icu
resources and staff has pushed
capacity to nearly fall
southern california is under strain too
but one of its infected residents isn't
troubling the hospital system i'm in the
middle of a show i just forgot okay
ellen degeneres's tv year complete with
live studio audience has been cut short
she's isolating after testing positive
to the virus greg jennings abc news
washington
the prime minister has responded to the
termination of the queensland university
vaccine deal by ordering millions more
doses of other promising
candidates well scott morrison says the
government's strategy from the start was
to build a diverse portfolio of options
as james norman explains the news over